# PLINK 2.0 Documentation on Linkage Disequilibrium
**https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/2.0/ld** 
**Read:** July 20, 2026

## Main Points
PLINK is the industry standard toolkit for GWAS analysis. The PLINK2.0 Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) function **--r2** produces the $ r^2 $ of the Pearson Correlation Coefficient ($r$) value. All of my LD calculations, on the other hand, produce just the $r$ value. 

PLINK's LD computation allows for the specification of calculation window sizes: namely, by using the functions **--ld-window**, **--ld-window-kb**, and **--ld-window-r2**. Respectively, each function limits the window sizes by variant count, kilobase distance on the genome, and $r^2$ value thresholds. It is important to note that since LD is negatively correlated with physical distance on the chromosome, as two far-apart SNPs are likely to be separated in recombination, that window thresholds are a good limitation to reduce the number of calculations by omitting ones that will produce a negligible/very small LD value. This changes the complexity of LD computation from $O(n^2)$ to $O(nW)$, where $W$ is a value given by the window size. It isn't hard to see that when $n >> W$, the process will run much faster than that which has a complexity of $O(n^2)$.

My LD calculations all fall into the complexity of $ O(n^2) $, and given that my three approaches, ld_naive, ld_numpy, and ld_torch_cpu, all fall into code optimization rather than algorithmic optimization, this raises the following question: given PLINK's approach to omit certain calculations with a degree of uncertainty, is there a way to reduce the matrix sizes (thus number of variant pairs) in the computation since we know that not all pairs are statistically significant? My first instinct is to learn about projection of higher dimension matrices to lower dimensions. Common methods include Principle Component Analysis (PCA), Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). It seems like the optimization goal of this project can be approached from both the hardware and the algorithmic end with more math intuition. This is worth revisiting after I learn the maths behind projection. 